---
author: 
categories:
- Theme Features
- R
- package
date: "2019-07-01"
draft: false
excerpt: I contributed in multiple capacities to this two-year long participatory public consultation project that delivered a draft for state-level cycle rickshaw bill and filled the knowledge gap that previously crippled policy actions on the subject.
layout: single
links:
- icon: globe
  icon_pack: fas
  name: website
  url: https://www.sumnet.in/cycle-rickshaw-bill-advocacy-pedals-ahead/
subtitle: 2017-2019
tags:
- hugo-site
title: Draft Bill for Cycle Rickshaw in Bihar and Jharkhand 
---

I contributed in multiple capacities to this two-year long participatory
public consultation project that delivered a draft for state-level cycle
rickshaw bill and filled the knowledge gap that previously crippled
policy actions on the subject.

## Aim

-   To advocate for drafting and implementing a law to protect the
    interests of cycle rickshaw drivers in Bihar and Jharkhand.

-   To bring recognition to the role of cycle rickshaw in providing
    accesible livelihood opportunity and a sustainable mode of transport
    in cities and towns of Bihar/Jharkhand.

## Process

The project team conducted more than hundred meetings spread over all
major town of Bihar and Jharkhand during 2017-19, starting with a
state-level preparatory meeting of facilitators in Patna where
the methods of ensuring a robust participatory processes in policy
making was deliberated upon.

In all the town-level meetings with stakeholders which we organised, we
focused on two key questions:

-   What are the challenges of cycle rickshaw as a mode of transport and
    how can it be improved?

-   How the working conditions and quality of life of cycle rickshaw
    pullers can be improved?

The town-level meetings were attended by a range of stakeholders
including cycle rickshaw drivers, rickshaw owners, rickshaw mechanics,
union representatives, political party representatives, and government
officials. The process was anchored by Rajendra Ravi (Institute for
Democracy and Sustainability, Delhi) and mentored by Raju Bhise (Yuva,
Mumbai), Sanskrit Menon (Centre for Environment Education, Pune) and
Nishant Singh (IIT Delhi). Advocacy team received various suggestions
concerning the issues of licensing of cycle rickshaws, fare structure,
cycle rickshaw zones and exclusive lanes/ networks, parking for
cycle rickshaws, social security measures for rickshaw drivers and so
on.

## Output

A [draft Cycle Rickshaw (Protection of Livelihood, Promotion of
Sustainable and Eco-friendly mobility)
Act](https://www.sumnet.in/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Cycle-Rickshaw-Bill_Draft.docx.pdf)
was prepared with the contribution of [Alternative Law Forum,
Bangalore](http://altlawforum.org/about/) that incorporated most, if not
all, of the knowledge and feedback that was generated from the ground
work and consultations.

## Supported By

-   [Sustainable Urban Mobility Network (SUM Net)
    India](https://www.sumnet.in)
